As part of our Business Model Explainer series, this post highlights one of the best
monetization strategies for someone who is just getting started online: the AdSense
Business Model.
Though this approach may seem fairly limited at first, AdSense can be scaled all the way up,
with the potential to earn you tens of thousands of dollars a month once you understand
what you are doing. By the end of this article, you will fully understand what Google AdSense
is, how it works, and if it is the right way for you to make money online.
What is Google AdSense?
Google AdSense is an ad network that allows you to place ads on your website, and profit
when people click on the ads. The program can use keywords and other data to place ads
relevant to the website content. The ads themselves are sourced from the advertisers using
Google AdWords and their Display Network.
When you search for something on Google, there are usually two, maybe four paid ads in
the search at the top and at the bottom. These ads are known as AdWords.
AdSense is the same thing, only instead of the ads appearing on the search engine page,
they appear on an actual website. Usually they will be in blocks of text, but they can
sometimes appear as pictures.
Here are a couple of examples of AdSense ads:
As you can see, AdSense ads are usually on the sidebar, or at the top of the website.
They can also appear within the actual content, and including ads in this way is one of the
many means by which people can split test their website to get the best earnings.
If you are unfamiliar with what split testing is, it is just testing something new against what
was on the website before to see if it will make more money. An example of this might be
split testing an AdSense placement within the content of the site, and a placement on the
right side of the site.
How Do You Earn Money with Google AdSense?
When people come to a website and click on an ad, Google earns money from the ad
placement, and then pays the website owner a percentage of what is earned. The people
creating these ads are marketers using Google AdWords, who have decided to expand their
reach beyond just Google search and into what is called the Google Display Network (GDN).
The GDN is just a network of websites where the publishers have decided to monetize their
sites using Google AdSense. Google reads their websites, finds out what they are about, and
then targets website visitors with relevant ads, which come from the marketers who are using
AdWords to associate their ads with certain keywords.
How you earn money goes like this:
1. Traffic to website
2. Traffic clicks on Google ad
3. Google charges the AdWord advertiser
4. Google splits what they charge the advertiser with you
This is why Google AdSense can be very lucrative for someone just starting out. You don’t need
to target your ads to your audience, because Google will do that work for you.
Every AdWord ad works through what is called Cost-Per-Click (CPC); this is exactly what it
sounds like. If the CPC is $5, it means that every time someone clicks on the ad, the advertiser
pays Google around $5. CPC varies based on the popularity of certain keywords and other
factors.
Out of that $5, Google takes a portion, and passes the rest on to the website owner who
allowed Google to put ads on the website.
Because of this, many website owners who want to increase their revenue with Google
AdSense will target words with higher CPCs so they can get a higher amount from the split
between them and Google.
Examples of AdSense Sites:
Here are a few actual AdSense sites which you can explore, and can get a feel for how AdSense
works. Some of these sites will not look like AdSense sites to you at first. This is because many
only show images, instead of the traditional block text that is associated with AdSense.
Cydia Guide — The Small AdSense Niche Site
This is an example of how a small niche site looks when monetized via AdSense. There are
millions of sites out there like this, and most of them talk about one very specific subject. In
this case it is Cydia, a popular jailbreaking software for smartphones.
Sites like this can often start making money relatively quickly, but they usually cannot expand
much beyond the $100-700 a month range.
The reason they can’t continue to grow is that most niche sites are set up with too much
specificity. This website is about one thing, and one thing only — Cydia. This kind of specificity
is great for a niche site. But this site would have trouble growing into an authority about
different iPhone software because its very name, “Cydia Guide,” is a specific and well-known
hack for smartphones.
Most niche sites are subject to this problem, and it’s one reason why they never become
bigger authority sites.
Mashable — The Authority Site Model
Mashable is a huge blog, which talks mainly about tech news. They get millions of visitors a
month and have developed their own bonafide publishing company, which people actually
seek to be featured on.
That being said, Mashable is a huge AdSense earner. You’ll find AdSense ads throughout the
website, bringing in millions of dollars in revenue for the tech blog.
Authority blogs, like Mashable, usually cover a broader range of topics than niche sites. And
because of this, their earning potential is a lot greater than that of niche sites.
The chief drawback to the authority site is that they can often take longer to build. Plus, your
content needs to be better and more valuable, which can lead to a need for higher investment
in skilled writers if you decide not to write the content yourself.